Basketball Notes
The Rules
Basketball is a team sport. Two teams of five players each try to score by shooting
a ball through a hoop elevated 10 feet above the ground. The game is played on a
rectangular floor called the court, and there is a hoop at each end. The court is
divided into two main sections by the mid-court line (10 second line). If the
offensive team puts the ball into play behind the mid-court line, it has ten
seconds to get the ball over the mid-court line. If it doesn't, then the defense gets
the ball. Once the offensive team gets the ball over the mid-court line, it can no
longer have possession of the ball in the area in back of the line. If it does, the
defense is awarded the ball.
Defensive Player
The ball is moved down the court toward the basket by passing
or dribbling. The team with the ball is called the offense.
The team without the ball is called the defense.
They try to steal the ball, contest shots, steal and deflect passes,
and garner rebounds.
Offensive Player


When a team makes a basket, they score two points and the ball goes to the
other team. If a basket, or field goal, is made outside of the three-point arc, then
that basket is worth three points. A free throw is worth one point. Free throws
are awarded to a team according to some formats involving the number of fouls
committed in a half and/or the type of foul committed. Fouling a shooter always
results in two or three free throws being awarded the shooter, depending upon
where he was when he shot. If he was beyond the three-point line, then he gets
three shots. Other types of fouls do not result in free throws being awarded until
a certain number (7) have accumulated during a half. Once that number is
reached, then the player who was fouled is awarded a '1-and-1' opportunity. If he
makes his first free throw, he gets to attempt a second. If he misses the first shot,
the ball is live on the rebound. When each team reaches 10 team fouls in a half,
the person fouled is awarded 2 free throws. This format starts over in the second
half of the game.
Each game is divided into sections. All levels have two halves. In NorWossa, each
half is 20 minutes long. The halves are divided into 10 minute quarters. There is a
gap of several minutes (5-10) between halves. Gaps between quarters are
relatively short (2 minutes). If the score is tied at the end of regulation, then
overtime periods of various lengths are played until a winner emerges.


Each team is assigned a basket or goal to defend. This means that the other
basket is their scoring basket. At halftime, the teams switch goals. The game
begins with one player from either team at center court. A referee will toss the
ball up between the two. The player that gets his hands on the ball will tip it to a
teammate. This is called a tip-off. In addition to stealing the ball from an opposing
player, there are other ways for a team to get the ball.
Substitutions:
a. A substitute shall report to the scorer and position himself in the 8' Substitution
Box located in front of the scorer's table. He shall give his name, number and
whom he is to replace. The scorer shall sound the horn as soon as the ball is dead
to indicate a substitution. The horn does not have to be sounded if the
substitution occurs between periods or during timeouts. No substitute may enter
the game after a successful field goal by either team, unless the ball is dead due
to a personal foul, technical foul, timeout or violation. He may enter the game
after the first of multiple free throws, whether made or missed.


b. The substitute shall remain in the Substitution Box until he is beckoned onto
the court by an official. If the ball is about to become live, the beckoning signal
shall be withheld. Any player who enters the court prior to being beckoned by an
official shall be assessed a technical foul.
c. A substitute must be ready to enter the game when beckoned. No delays for
removal of warm-up clothing will be permitted.
d. The substitute shall not replace a free throw shooter or a player involved in a
jump ball unless dictated to do so by an injury whereby he is selected by the
opposing coach. At no time may he be allowed to attempt a free throw awarded
as a result of a technical foul.
e. The number of substitutions allowed per team per game is unlimited.
Fouls and Violations
FOULS
Personal fouls: Personal fouls include any type of illegal physical contact. Each
player is allowed 5 personal fouls. On the fifth, the player is asked to leave the
game.
 Hitting
 Pushing
 Slapping
 Holding
 Illegal pick/screen -- when an offensive
player is moving. When an offensive player
sticks out a limb and makes physical contact
with a defender in an attempt to block the
path of the defender.


Personal foul penalties: If a player is shooting and is fouled, then she gets two
free throws if her shot doesn't go in, but only one free throw if her shot does go
in.
 Three free throws are awarded if the player is fouled while shooting for a
three-point goal and they miss their shot. If a player is fouled while
shooting a three-point shot and makes it anyway, he is awarded one free
throw. Thus, he could score four points on the play.
 Inbounds. If fouled while not shooting, the ball is given to the team the foul
was committed upon. They get the ball at the nearest side or baseline, out
of bounds, and have 5 seconds to pass the ball onto the court.
 One & one. If the team committing the foul has seven or more fouls in one
half of the game, then the player who was fouled is awarded one free
throw. If he makes his first shot, then he is awarded another free throw.(1
on 1) ( this team is in the Bonus Situation)
 Ten or more fouls. If the team committing the foul has ten or more fouls,
then the fouled player receives two free throws.
Charging. An offensive foul that is committed when a player pushes or runs over a
defensive player. The ball is given to the team that the foul was committed upon.
Blocking. Blocking is illegal personal contact resulting from a
defender not establishing position in time to prevent an
opponent's drive to the basket.


Flagrant foul. Violent contact with an opponent. This includes hitting, kicking, and
punching. This type of foul results in free throws plus the offense retaining
possession of the ball after the free throws. Usually results in the ejection of the
offending player.
Intentional foul. When a player makes physical contact with another player with
no reasonable effort to steal the ball. It is a judgment call for the officials.
Technical foul. Technical foul. A player or a coach can commit this type of foul. It
does not involve player contact or the ball but is instead about the 'manners' of
the game. Foul language, obscenity, obscene gestures, and even arguing can be
considered a technical foul, as can technical details regarding filling in the
scorebook improperly or dunking during warm-ups.


VIOLATIONS
Walking/Traveling. Taking more than 'a step and a half' without dribbling the ball
is traveling. Moving your pivot foot once you've stopped dribbling is traveling. :
Moving the feet while in possession of the ball without dribbling.
Carrying/palming. When a player dribbles the ball with his hand too far to the
side of or, sometimes, even under the ball.
Double Dribble. Dribbling the ball with both hands on the ball at the same time or
picking up the dribble and then dribbling again is a double dribble.


Held ball. Occasionally, two or more opposing players will gain possession of the
ball at the same time. In order to avoid a prolonged and/or violent tussle, the
referee stops the action and awards the ball to one team or the other on a
rotating basis. (alternating possession arrow)
Goaltending. If a defensive player interferes with a shot while it's on the way
down toward the basket, while it's on the way up toward the basket after having
touched the backboard, or while it's in the cylinder above the rim, it's goaltending
and the shot counts. If committed by an offensive player, it's a violation and the
ball is awarded to the opposing team for a throw-in.
Backcourt violation. Once the offense has brought the ball across the mid-court
line, they cannot go back across the line during possession. If they do, the ball is
awarded to the other team to pass inbounds. (over and back)
Time restrictions. A player passing the ball inbounds has five seconds to pass the
ball. If he does not, then the ball is awarded to the other team. Other time
restrictions include the rule that a player cannot have the ball for more than five
seconds when being closely guarded.


Player Positions
Center. Centers are generally your tallest players. They generally are positioned
near the basket.
Offensive -- The center's goal is to get open for a pass and to shoot. They are also
responsible for blocking defenders, known as picking or screening, to open other
players up for driving to the basket for a goal. Centers are expected to get some
offensive rebounds and put-backs.
Defensive -- On defense, the center's main responsibility is to keep opponents
from shooting by blocking shots and passes in the key area. They also are
expected to get a lot of rebounds because they're taller.
Forward. Your next tallest players will most likely be your forwards. While a
forward may be called upon to play under the hoop, they may also be required to
operate in the wings and corner areas.
Offensive -- Forwards are responsible to get free for a pass, take outside shots,
drive for goals, and rebound.


Defensive -- Responsibilities include preventing drives to the goal and rebounding.
Guard. These are potentially your shortest players and they should be really good
at dribbling fast, seeing the court, and passing. It is their job to bring the ball
down the court and set up offensive plays.
Offensive -- Dribbling, passing, and setting up offensive plays are a guard's main
responsibilities. They also need to be able to drive to the basket and to shoot
from the perimeter.
Defensive -- On defense, a guard is responsible for stealing passes, contesting
shots, preventing drives to the hoop, and for boxing out.
Alternating-Possession Rule - In high school basketball, most jump balls have
been eliminated in favor of a rule that the teams take turns gaining possession for
a throw-in after a held ball and similar stoppages of play when possession is in
question. The possession arrow indicates which team gets the ball on the next
such occasion.
The referee uses the alternating possession rule to speed up play and to create
“fairness” between teams.
Example: During the tip off – Fort Frances Muskies gain possession. The referee
will tell the scorers’ table to indicate on the score clock that the Kenora Broncos
get the next questionable possession. At the beginning of the second quarter the
referee will award the throw in to the team indicated on the clock. The referee
will continue in this fashion for the entire game. Questionable possessions
include:
“jump ball” – two players fighting over the ball,
A ball becomes lodged between the rim and the backboard.


BASKETBALL SKILLS
Dribbling/Ballhandling
Most coaches use dribbling and ballhandling interchangeably. Though they are
linked, the 2 skills are definitely separate.
Dribbling and controlling the ball is a skill that can be practiced alone and is
separate from the other ball skills on the court. Ballhandling, however, involves
knowledge of the game and integrates dribbling, passing and decision-making.
Practicing and improving your dribbling is a simple task. There are innumerable
dribbling drills that are in use today that are challenging and effective. The set of
drills that have come to be known as "Maravich Drills," (after the late ball-
handling wizard Pete Maravich) are widely known. They include drills such as
passing the ball around your body, dribble figure 8s, spider dribbling, drop and
catch.
Practicing and improving your ballhandling requires imagination, as you have to
put yourself in game situations.
9 Tips To Improve Your Dribbling & Ball Handling
Here are 9 tips from pro coach Don Kelbick.
1.Dribble the ball hard. The more time the ball spends in your hand, the more
control you have of the ball. The harder you dribble, the quicker it gets back in
your hand.
2.Head up at all times. Look at the rim or a spot on the wall during all practice.
3.Use your finger tips to control the ball, not your palm.
4.Use your imagination. Picture when and how you would use each of the
dribbles.
6.Basketball is a game of length. Work on lengthening the dribble. Work to get
your opportunities with 1 dribble. You don't beat defenses with your dribble. You
beat people with your feet; you SEPARATE from your defense with the dribble.
7.Basketball is also a game of angles. Try to move in straight lines. Whenever you
make an "East-West" move (something that takes you toward the sideline), re-
capture a "North-South" path (direct line to the basket) as quickly as possible.


8.Don't do things in 2 dribbles that you can do in 1.
9.Practice outside your comfort zone. Experiment; go faster than you are used to,
use your imagination. When working on new skills, don't be concerned with losing
the ball. Just pick it up and do it again. If you practice only things that are
comfortable, then you will never improve
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=ZNM8e4qReno
Basketball Shooting Technique & Mechanics
1. Remember BEEF (Balance, Eye, Elbow, Follow Through) when shooting the
basketball. Another nice method to remember is putting your hand "In the cookie
jar." This will help you with your follow through which increases accuracy. Get
into the habit of always using these proper shooting techniques - whether in
practices or a game. If proper techniques are not used, bad habits are formed that
are often difficult to correct. If players don't have a shooting technique - they
need to develop one!
2. Be relaxed and concentrate on the basket. Focus on the back of the rim as you
make a jump shot or shoot from the free throw line. When shooting lay-ups and
bank shots, focus on the part of the backboard where you will bank the ball.
3. Know when you have a good shot - and then take it. Find the right balance
between shooting too often and not shooting enough. As you develop confidence
in your shot, you will also develop the ability to know when you have a good shot
to take.
4. Be in proper balance when shooting the basketball. Proper balance (front to
back and side to side) is critical on all shots.
5. Follow through on every shot you take. Hold your follow through as this is one
thing that will show you why you made or missed the shot.
6. Jump naturally. please!! Avoid forcing your jump - it should be nice and easy.
You should jump straight up in the air smoothly and release the shot at the top of
your jump letting the force easily slide off your fingers at the same time
7. Make sure you have an arc on every shot you take. The height of the arc will
vary from player to player. Some players shoot with a high arc, while others have
more of a flat shot. As long as you are using proper shooting techniques and the
shots are going in, then the arc is fine.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Yf1RMtXE5Y&feature=player_detailpage


TYPES OF PASSES
There are essentially two types of passes:
•Air Pass - The pass travels between players without hitting the floor.
•Bounce Passes - The pass is thrown to the floor so that it bounces to the
intended receiver
Each type of pass comes with its own variations.
Basic Variations:
- Chest Pass
- Bounce Pass
- Overhead Pass
- Wrap Around Pass
Advanced Variations:
- Baseball Pass
- Dribble Pass
- Behind-the-Back Pass
- Pick and Roll Pass
TEACHING POINTS
When teaching passing, points of emphasis should be:
•A good pass is a pass a teammate can catch
•When passing, step toward your receiver.
•When catching, step toward the pass
•Like shooting, the ball should have a backspin to it. This is accomplished by
following through on every pass.


Basic Passes
CHEST PASS
The chest pass is named so because the pass originates from the chest. It is
thrown by gripping the ball on the sides with the thumbs directly behind the ball.
When the pass is thrown, the fingers are rotated behind the ball and the thumbs
are turned down. The resulting follow through has the back of the hands facing
one another with the thumbs straight down. The ball should have a nice backspin.
When throwing a chest pass, the players should strive to throw it to the receiver's
chest level. Passes that go low to high or high to low are difficult to catch.
BOUNCE PASS
The bounce pass is thrown with the same motion however it is aimed at the floor.
It should be thrown far enough out that the ball bounces waist high to the
receiver. Some say try to throw it 3/4 of the way to the receiver, and that may be
a good reference point to start, but each player has to experiment how far to
throw it so it bounces to the receiver properly. Putting a proper and consistent
backspin on the pass will make the distance easier to judge.
OVERHEAD PASS
The overhead pass is often used as an outlet pass. Bring the ball directly above
your forehead with both hands on the side of the ball and follow through. Aim for
the teammate's chin. Some coaches advise not bring the ball behind your head,
because it can get stolen and it takes a split-second longer to throw the pass.


WRAP AROUND PASS
Step around the defense with your non-pivot foot. Pass the ball with one hand
(outside hand). It can be used as an air or a bounce pass. You will often see the
wrap-around, air pass on the perimeter and the wrap-around, bounce pass to
make an entry into the post.
Advanced Passes
BASEBALL PASS
A baseball pass is a one-handed pass that uses the same motion as a baseball
throw. This is often used to make long passes .Be careful with young kids. You
don't want them throw their arms out.
DRIBBLE PASS
The dribble pass is used to quickly pass the ball with one hand off of the dribble.
This can be an air or bounce pass. You'll see Steve Nash do this all of the time.


T
This is Steve Nash
BEHIND-THE-BACK PASS
A behind-the-back pass is when you wrap the ball around your back to throw the
ball. It is used to avoid the defender when making a pass across the front of you
would be risky. It can also be used to throw the ball to a player trailing on the fast
break.
PICK AND ROLL PASS
This is a pass that is used when the defenders double-team or switch on the pick
and roll. If dribbling to the right, your left side is facing the target and you bring
the ball up from your right side to throw the ball overhead to the screener who
has either rolled to the basket or popped to the perimeter. The pass is used to
shield the ball from the defender, and many times is thrown in "hook shot"
fashion. Advanced players can do this while slightly fading away from the
defender.
LAY-UPS
The lay-up is the easiest shot and the first shot you should learn. It's not as easy
as it looks at first, as a lot of kids have difficulty getting the correct footwork, and
shooting off the correct foot. Then you must also learn to use either hand, and
eventually do the reverse lay-up.


Footwork
When dribbling toward the basket, move slightly to one side of the hoop to create
the proper angle. If you're on the right side, dribble right-handed, and plant your
left (inside) foot and jump off that foot, and finally shoot with your right hand. As
you raise your right hand, your right knee should also elevate. Pretend there is a
string attached to your right hand and your right knee. Reverse this form if
shooting from the left side.
As you approach the hoop, take a half step with your outside foot, then take a full
stride with your inside foot pushing off the court. When jumping your outside
knee should be bent. Go directly toward the basket, with your head up and eyes
focused on the backboard. Go up strong and straight to the hoop. Don't shy away
if there is a defender, just go strong to the hoop. You may get fouled and get a
three point chance.
Aim
Always use the backboard ("use the glass") when shooting lay-ups from either
side. Aim for the top corner of the box on the backboard. Focus in on this area;
don't watch the ball. Keep your head up.
The Push Release
Younger players who are not yet strong enough for the underhand release should
use the push release. Release the ball with the back of your hands facing you.
Extend your shooting arm, as you push the ball to the hoop off your fingertips.
You should go up with two hands, then release the ball with your outside hand. A
very young player may need to shoot the ball with two hands.
Underhand Release
As you get stronger, you should develop the underhand shot. This release results
in a softer shot, and more control when you are moving at high speed. Release
the ball with your palm up and arm extended. Let the ball roll off your palm and
then your fingertips, and lay the ball softly off the backboard. Use two hands
going up, but then release the ball with your outside hand at the top of your
jump. Be strong and concentrate... "finish"!
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=rV-4Jk2oOYE


